Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: ventilators.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. What is the purpose of an anaesthetic ventilator,
and what must it achieve?
An anaesthetic ventilator is the device that mechanically inflates the patient's
lungs, taking over or supporting the work of breathing during anaesthesia,
and its purpose is to deliver controlled or assisted ventilation reliably,
accurately and safely while the patient is anaesthetised,
paralysed or unable to breathe adequately.
Mechanical ventilation is needed in anaesthesia for several reasons:
general anaesthesia and muscle relaxants depress or abolish spontaneous breathing;
many operations require the patient to be still and apnoeic;
and controlled ventilation allows the precise management of carbon dioxide and
oxygenation.
The ventilator must achieve several things.
It must deliver a tidal volume, or generate an airway pressure,
sufficient to ventilate the lungs adequately, at a set rate,
with a controlled ratio of inspiratory to expiratory time.
It must do so accurately and reproducibly,
compensating for the compliance and resistance of the patient and the breathing
system. It must allow the composition of the gas — oxygen and anaesthetic agent —
to be controlled, working with the breathing system.
It must permit a range of ventilatory modes to suit different patients and
situations, from full control to partial support.
And, crucially, it must be safe, incorporating monitoring and alarms to detect
disconnection, obstruction, excessive pressure and inadequate ventilation,
since failure of ventilation is rapidly fatal.
So the anaesthetic ventilator mechanically inflates the lungs to take over or
support breathing during anaesthesia, and it must deliver an adequate,
accurate and reproducible tidal volume or pressure at a controlled rate and
inspiratory-expiratory ratio, allow control of gas composition,
offer a range of modes, and, above all,
be safe with monitoring and alarms against the rapidly fatal failure of ventilation.
How may ventilators be classified?
Ventilators may be classified in several ways,
and although the classifications can seem complex,
they organise an understanding of how a ventilator controls the breath,
which is fundamental to using it correctly.
One major basis of classification is the variable that the ventilator controls
during inspiration — the control variable.
A volume controller, or volume generator,
delivers a set tidal volume regardless of the pressure required,
so the volume is guaranteed but the pressure varies with compliance and resistance.
A pressure controller, or pressure generator, generates a set airway pressure,
so the pressure is guaranteed but the delivered volume varies with compliance and
resistance. A second basis is the cycling mechanism — what determines the change
from inspiration to expiration.
A time-cycled ventilator changes after a set time;
a volume-cycled ventilator after a set volume is delivered;
a pressure-cycled ventilator when a set pressure is reached;
and a flow-cycled ventilator when inspiratory flow falls to a set level.
A third basis is the source of power and the mechanism — pneumatically or
electrically driven, and the mechanical arrangement such as the bag-in-bottle
bellows, the piston, or the intermittent blower.
A fourth is the breathing-system relationship — minute-volume dividers,
bag-squeezers and intermittent flow generators.
Modern microprocessor-controlled ventilators combine these features flexibly and
can behave as volume or pressure controllers with various cycling.
So ventilators are classified by their control variable (volume or pressure
generator), their cycling mechanism (time-, volume-, pressure- or flow-cycled),
their power source and mechanism (pneumatic or electric; bellows,
piston or blower), and their relationship to the breathing system — classifications
that describe how the ventilator controls and ends the breath.
Distinguish volume-controlled from pressure-controlled ventilation.
Volume-controlled and pressure-controlled ventilation are the two fundamental modes
of delivering a mechanical breath, distinguished by which variable is set and
guaranteed, and understanding their differences and respective merits is essential
to rational ventilation.
In volume-controlled ventilation, the ventilator delivers a set tidal volume into
the lungs, regardless of the pressure required to do so;
the volume is therefore guaranteed and the minute ventilation predictable,
but the airway pressure generated depends on the compliance and resistance of the
lungs and system and may rise to high levels if these worsen,
with a risk of barotrauma unless a pressure limit is set.
The flow is typically delivered at a constant rate,
giving a characteristic rising airway pressure during inspiration.
In pressure-controlled ventilation,
the ventilator generates a set inspiratory airway pressure,
held constant through inspiration, and the tidal volume that results depends on the
compliance and resistance — so the pressure is guaranteed and limited,
protecting against barotrauma, but the delivered volume varies and may fall if
compliance worsens, with a risk of inadequate ventilation unless monitored.
The flow pattern is decelerating, high at first then falling as the lungs fill,
which can give better gas distribution and lower peak pressures.
The choice between them balances the guarantee of volume against the limitation of
pressure: volume control assures minute ventilation but risks high pressures,
while pressure control limits pressure but risks variable volume.
Modern hybrid modes aim to combine the advantages,
delivering a target volume within a pressure limit.
So volume-controlled ventilation guarantees a set tidal volume but allows variable,
potentially high pressure, while pressure-controlled ventilation guarantees a
limited set pressure but allows variable volume;
the choice trades assured ventilation against pressure limitation,
with hybrid modes seeking both.
Describe the bag-in-bottle, or bellows, ventilator.
The bag-in-bottle, or bellows, ventilator is a classic and widely used design of
anaesthetic ventilator, and understanding it illustrates the important principle of
separating the driving gas from the patient's gas.
In this design, a bellows containing the patient's gas — the gas of the breathing
system — is enclosed within a rigid transparent chamber, or bottle.
The space between the bellows and the chamber wall is connected to a supply of
driving gas.
During inspiration, driving gas is admitted into the chamber around the bellows,
compressing the bellows and so driving the patient's gas from within it into the
breathing system and the lungs; the volume delivered corresponds to the bellows
compression.
During expiration, the driving gas is vented from the chamber,
and the bellows refills with gas from the breathing system as the patient exhales
and fresh gas flows in, the bellows re-expanding.
The essential feature is that the driving gas, which powers the ventilator,
is kept entirely separate from the patient's gas within the bellows,
so the patient breathes only the controlled breathing-system gas and is not exposed
to the driving gas.
The bellows may be ascending, rising on expiration — preferred because it collapses
and is obviously empty if disconnected,
giving a visible disconnection warning — or descending,
which can fill by gravity even if disconnected and so mask a disconnection.
The bellows movement provides a visual monitor of ventilation.
So the bag-in-bottle ventilator drives the patient's gas from a bellows by
admitting separate driving gas into the surrounding chamber,
keeping driving and patient gas separate;
the ascending bellows is preferred for the visible disconnection warning it gives
by collapsing, and the bellows movement monitors ventilation.
Why is the separation of driving gas and patient gas important?
The separation of the driving gas from the patient's gas,
achieved in the bag-in-bottle and similar designs,
is an important safety and functional principle,
and explaining it clarifies a key aspect of ventilator design.
In many ventilators, the power to inflate the lungs is provided by a flow of
driving gas, often oxygen or air at pipeline pressure, which acts upon a bellows,
piston or bag containing the patient's gas.
If the driving gas and the patient's gas were not separated,
the driving gas would enter the breathing system and the patient's lungs,
with several undesirable consequences:
it would dilute and alter the carefully controlled composition of the
breathing-system gas — the oxygen concentration and the anaesthetic agent
concentration — so that the patient might receive an unintended mixture,
risking awareness or an incorrect oxygen concentration;
it would consume large volumes of driving gas;
and it would couple the patient's ventilation to the driving gas supply.
By keeping the driving gas in a separate compartment,
acting only mechanically upon the bellows or piston,
the patient breathes solely the controlled breathing-system gas,
and the composition delivered remains as set,
while the driving gas merely provides the motive power and is vented separately.
This separation thus preserves the integrity of the delivered gas mixture and the
control of anaesthetic depth and oxygenation.
Some modern ventilators use a piston driven by an electric motor,
dispensing with a driving gas altogether and so achieving the same separation by
mechanical means, with the advantage of not consuming driving gas.
So separating driving gas from patient gas is important because it prevents the
driving gas from diluting and altering the controlled composition of the
breathing-system gas, preserving the set oxygen and agent concentration and the
control of anaesthesia, while providing the motive power separately — achieved by
the bellows-in-bottle or by an electric piston.
What is positive end-expiratory pressure, and why is it used?
Positive end-expiratory pressure, abbreviated PEEP,
is the maintenance of a positive airway pressure at the end of expiration,
above atmospheric, and it is an important adjunct to mechanical ventilation with
significant physiological effects and applications.
Normally, at the end of expiration during mechanical ventilation,
the airway pressure returns to atmospheric, zero; with PEEP,
a valve or mechanism maintains a set positive pressure — commonly five to ten
centimetres of water or more — at end-expiration,
so that the lungs do not fully deflate to their resting state.
The principal purpose of PEEP is to prevent the collapse of alveoli and small
airways at end-expiration and to re-expand collapsed alveoli,
thereby increasing the functional residual capacity,
reducing the atelectasis that readily develops during anaesthesia,
and improving oxygenation by reducing the shunt of blood through unventilated lung.
It is therefore used to improve oxygenation in anaesthesia and especially in
critical illness such as the acute respiratory distress syndrome.
PEEP also has effects to be considered: by raising the mean intrathoracic pressure,
it can impede venous return and reduce cardiac output,
particularly in the hypovolaemic patient; it can overdistend compliant alveoli,
risking barotrauma and increasing dead space;
and excessive PEEP can compromise the circulation.
The optimal PEEP balances the improvement in oxygenation and lung recruitment
against these adverse effects.
So PEEP maintains a positive airway pressure at end-expiration to prevent alveolar
collapse, increase functional residual capacity,
reduce atelectasis and improve oxygenation by reducing shunt,
but it raises intrathoracic pressure and may impede venous return and cardiac
output and risk overdistension, so the optimal level balances benefit against these
effects.
Describe the assisted and supported modes of ventilation.
Beyond full controlled ventilation,
ventilators offer assisted and supported modes that allow the patient to contribute
to or trigger breaths, and these are increasingly used in anaesthesia and critical
care to maintain some respiratory effort and ease weaning,
so an account of them is warranted.
In fully controlled ventilation, the ventilator delivers all breaths at a set rate
and pattern regardless of the patient,
appropriate for the paralysed or apnoeic patient.
Assisted and supported modes, by contrast,
respond to the patient's own inspiratory efforts.
In pressure-support ventilation, the patient triggers each breath by their
inspiratory effort, and the ventilator responds by delivering a set level of
positive pressure to support that breath,
augmenting the patient's spontaneous tidal volume;
the patient controls the rate and timing, and the ventilator provides assistance,
which can be adjusted from full support to minimal as the patient recovers.
In synchronised intermittent mandatory ventilation,
the ventilator delivers a set number of mandatory breaths synchronised with the
patient's efforts, while allowing the patient to take additional spontaneous
breaths, often pressure-supported, between them.
Triggering may be by a fall in pressure or a change in flow caused by the patient's
effort, the sensitivity being adjustable.
These modes maintain respiratory muscle activity,
may improve patient comfort and gas distribution,
reduce the haemodynamic effects of full control,
and facilitate weaning from ventilation.
They require the patient to have some respiratory drive and an appropriate level of
anaesthesia.
So assisted and supported modes, such as pressure-support and synchronised
intermittent mandatory ventilation,
allow the patient to trigger breaths that the ventilator augments or interposes
with mandatory breaths, maintaining respiratory effort,
improving comfort and gas distribution,
reducing haemodynamic effects and aiding weaning,
requiring preserved respiratory drive.
Explain the inspiratory-to-expiratory ratio and the inspiratory pause.
The timing of the ventilatory cycle,
expressed as the inspiratory-to-expiratory ratio,
and the use of an inspiratory pause,
are important parameters that influence gas exchange and the haemodynamic effects
of ventilation, and adjusting them appropriately is part of skilled ventilation.
The respiratory cycle is divided into an inspiratory and an expiratory phase,
and their relative durations are expressed as the inspiratory-to-expiratory ratio,
conventionally about one to two in normal ventilation — inspiration occupying a
third of the cycle and expiration two-thirds.
This longer expiratory time allows adequate time for passive expiration,
which is important because expiration is passive and slower,
and insufficient expiratory time leads to incomplete exhalation and gas trapping.
The ratio may be altered for particular purposes: a longer inspiratory time,
or even an inverse ratio with inspiration longer than expiration,
can improve oxygenation in stiff lungs by raising the mean airway pressure and
improving gas distribution, but reduces expiratory time and risks gas trapping and
haemodynamic compromise; conversely,
conditions with airflow obstruction and slow expiration, such as asthma,
require a longer expiratory time, a smaller ratio,
to allow complete exhalation and avoid dynamic hyperinflation.
An inspiratory pause, or end-inspiratory hold,
holds the delivered volume in the lungs briefly at the end of inspiration before
expiration; this allows time for gas to redistribute within the lungs to less
compliant regions, improving the evenness of ventilation and gas exchange,
and it allows the measurement of the plateau pressure that reflects alveolar
pressure.
So the inspiratory-to-expiratory ratio, normally about one to two,
allots time to the passive expiratory phase,
adjusted longer for oxygenation or shorter to allow exhalation in obstruction,
while an inspiratory pause holds the breath briefly to improve gas distribution and
allow plateau-pressure measurement.
What is the minute-volume divider, and how does it differ from a bag-squeezer?
The minute-volume divider and the bag-squeezer represent two contrasting older
approaches to anaesthetic ventilation,
and although now largely superseded by versatile electronic ventilators,
the distinction illustrates different relationships between the ventilator and the
fresh gas supply.
A minute-volume divider, exemplified historically by the Manley ventilator,
takes the entire fresh gas flow delivered by the anaesthetic machine and divides it
into tidal volumes: all the fresh gas is collected and then delivered to the
patient in breaths, so that the minute volume delivered to the patient equals the
fresh gas flow set on the machine, and the tidal volume and rate are determined by
how the ventilator divides that flow.
Thus the anaesthetist sets the minute ventilation by setting the fresh gas flow,
and the ventilator divides it; the entire fresh gas flow goes to the patient,
so it works with a non-circle, non-absorbing arrangement.
A bag-squeezer, or bag-in-bottle type, by contrast,
mechanically squeezes a bag or bellows to deliver a tidal volume independently of
the fresh gas flow, the tidal volume and rate being set on the ventilator
regardless of the fresh gas flow; this is the arrangement used with a circle
system, where the fresh gas flow and the ventilation are set independently.
The key difference is therefore whether the minute volume is determined by,
and equal to, the fresh gas flow, as in the divider, or set independently of it,
as in the bag-squeezer.
So the minute-volume divider delivers the whole fresh gas flow to the patient as
divided tidal volumes, the minute volume equalling the set fresh gas flow,
whereas the bag-squeezer delivers a tidal volume set independently of the fresh gas
flow, suiting the circle system — contrasting relationships between ventilation and
fresh gas flow.
What are the cardiovascular and respiratory effects of intermittent
positive-pressure ventilation?
Intermittent positive-pressure ventilation,
the mechanical inflation of the lungs by positive pressure,
has important physiological effects that differ from those of normal spontaneous
breathing, and understanding them is essential to anticipating and managing the
consequences of mechanical ventilation.
The fundamental difference is that spontaneous breathing generates a negative
intrathoracic pressure to draw air in,
whereas positive-pressure ventilation applies a positive pressure to push air in,
raising the intrathoracic pressure during inspiration.
The principal cardiovascular effect follows from this raised intrathoracic
pressure: it impedes the venous return of blood to the heart,
reducing the right ventricular filling and hence the cardiac output,
an effect most marked with high airway pressures, high PEEP,
and in the hypovolaemic patient, in whom positive-pressure ventilation can cause a
significant fall in blood pressure.
The raised intrathoracic pressure also affects the pulmonary circulation and the
afterload of the ventricles.
The respiratory effects include changes in the distribution of ventilation:
positive-pressure ventilation tends to distribute gas preferentially to the
non-dependent, more compliant regions of the lung,
while perfusion remains greatest in the dependent regions,
worsening the matching of ventilation and perfusion and increasing dead space and
shunt compared with spontaneous breathing,
with a tendency to atelectasis in dependent regions.
These effects are mitigated by appropriate fluid loading,
by limiting airway pressures, by PEEP to recruit lung,
and by lung-protective strategies.
So intermittent positive-pressure ventilation raises intrathoracic pressure,
which impedes venous return and reduces cardiac output,
especially with high pressures and hypovolaemia,
and alters the distribution of ventilation,
worsening ventilation-perfusion matching and promoting dependent atelectasis —
effects requiring attention to filling, pressures and recruitment.
Explain barotrauma, volutrauma and the principles of lung-protective ventilation.
Mechanical ventilation can itself injure the lungs,
and the recognition of ventilator-induced lung injury has led to the principles of
lung-protective ventilation, which are now fundamental to safe ventilation,
particularly of the injured lung.
Ventilator-induced lung injury arises through several mechanisms.
Barotrauma is injury from excessive airway pressure,
which can rupture alveoli and cause air leaks — pneumothorax,
surgical emphysema and pneumomediastinum.
Volutrauma is injury from excessive tidal volume overdistending the alveoli,
now recognised as a major mechanism, the overstretching damaging the alveolar walls.
Atelectrauma is injury from the repeated opening and closing of collapsed alveoli
with each breath, the cyclical shear stress damaging them.
Biotrauma is the release of inflammatory mediators from the injured lung,
which can propagate injury and contribute to multi-organ dysfunction.
These mechanisms, especially in the already injured lung as in the acute
respiratory distress syndrome, can worsen lung damage.
Lung-protective ventilation aims to minimise this injury by using a low tidal
volume, of the order of six millilitres per kilogram of predicted body weight,
to avoid volutrauma; limiting the plateau and driving pressures to avoid
barotrauma; applying adequate PEEP to keep alveoli open and prevent the cyclical
collapse of atelectrauma; and accepting a degree of permissive hypercapnia rather
than ventilating aggressively to normocarbia.
These principles, established in critical care,
are increasingly applied in the operating theatre.
So ventilator-induced lung injury arises from barotrauma, volutrauma,
atelectrauma and biotrauma, and lung-protective ventilation minimises it by low
tidal volumes, limited plateau and driving pressures, adequate PEEP,
and permissive hypercapnia — principles fundamental to ventilating the injured lung
and increasingly applied in anaesthesia.
How does the fresh gas flow interact with the delivered tidal volume,
and what is fresh gas decoupling?
The interaction between the fresh gas flow and the tidal volume delivered by the
ventilator is a subtle but important aspect of anaesthetic ventilation,
and the concept of fresh gas decoupling addresses a problem it can cause.
In a traditional anaesthetic ventilator connected to a circle system,
the fresh gas flow from the machine enters the breathing system continuously,
including during the inspiratory phase when the ventilator is delivering a breath.
Consequently, during inspiration, the fresh gas flowing in is added to the volume
the ventilator delivers, so that the actual tidal volume the patient receives is
the ventilator's set volume plus the fresh gas that flows in during inspiration;
thus changing the fresh gas flow changes the delivered tidal volume — an increase
in fresh gas flow increasing the tidal volume — which is the fresh gas flow
coupling effect.
This can cause unintended changes in ventilation when the fresh gas flow is
altered, and inaccuracy in the delivered volume.
Fresh gas decoupling is a design solution incorporated in modern machines that
separates, or decouples, the fresh gas flow from the tidal volume delivery:
by means of a valve, the fresh gas flow is diverted away from the patient circuit,
often into the reservoir bag, during the inspiratory phase,
so that it does not add to the delivered breath,
and is delivered during expiration instead;
thus the tidal volume the patient receives is the set volume,
independent of the fresh gas flow.
This improves the accuracy and constancy of ventilation.
So fresh gas flow coupling means that, traditionally,
fresh gas entering during inspiration adds to the ventilator's set volume,
so the delivered tidal volume varies with fresh gas flow,
while fresh gas decoupling diverts the fresh gas away from the breath during
inspiration, making the delivered tidal volume independent of the fresh gas flow
and improving accuracy.
What monitoring is essential during mechanical ventilation?
Mechanical ventilation, sustaining the patient's gas exchange,
demands comprehensive monitoring with alarms,
because failures of ventilation are rapidly fatal and many are silent until they
cause harm, so a systematic account of the essential monitoring is important.
Capnography is arguably the single most important monitor,
displaying the end-tidal carbon dioxide and the waveform:
it confirms ventilation and the placement of the airway,
reveals the adequacy of ventilation, and detects disconnection, obstruction,
rebreathing and many other events by the loss or change of the trace.
Airway pressure monitoring displays the inspiratory,
plateau and end-expiratory pressures and the pressure waveform,
detecting high pressures that risk barotrauma, obstruction, and,
by a low or absent pressure, disconnection; high- and low-pressure alarms are set.
Volume and flow monitoring measure the delivered and expired tidal and minute
volumes, confirming adequate ventilation and detecting leaks,
disconnection and changes in compliance, with a low-volume alarm.
A disconnection alarm, often based on pressure or volume,
specifically warns of the common and dangerous event of disconnection.
Inspired oxygen concentration is monitored to ensure adequate oxygen,
and oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry confirms oxygenation.
Agent concentration monitoring confirms the delivered anaesthetic.
Pressure-volume and flow-volume loops can be displayed,
giving information on compliance, resistance and the response to interventions.
The alarms must be enabled and appropriately set.
So essential monitoring during ventilation comprises capnography (confirming and
assessing ventilation and detecting many faults),
airway pressure monitoring with high- and low-pressure alarms,
volume and flow monitoring with a low-volume alarm, a disconnection alarm,
inspired oxygen and oxygen saturation, and agent monitoring,
with loops as adjuncts — a comprehensive system against the rapidly fatal failure
of ventilation.
How do anaesthetic ventilators differ from intensive-care ventilators?
Anaesthetic ventilators and intensive-care ventilators share the basic function of
mechanical ventilation but differ in design and capability to suit their different
contexts, and an awareness of the differences is useful,
particularly as the distinction has narrowed.
The traditional anaesthetic ventilator is integrated with the anaesthetic machine
and the circle breathing system with its carbon dioxide absorption,
designed to work with the recirculating,
agent-containing gas and the fresh gas flow,
often pneumatically driven by a bellows,
and providing the modes needed for the relatively short,
controlled circumstances of anaesthesia in a paralysed patient;
historically its range of modes and its ability to support the spontaneously
breathing or difficult patient were more limited.
The intensive-care ventilator, by contrast,
is designed for the prolonged ventilation of often critically ill patients with
severe lung disease, providing a wide range of sophisticated modes — including
advanced pressure, volume, assisted,
supported and weaning modes — fine triggering and flow control,
the capacity to deliver high pressures and flows,
and accommodation of spontaneous effort,
but it does not provide volatile anaesthesia and uses a different gas-delivery
arrangement, typically a continuous high-flow non-rebreathing or blending system
rather than a circle with absorption.
The distinction has narrowed because modern anaesthetic workstations now
incorporate ventilators with intensive-care-like modes and performance,
and some intensive-care ventilators can be adapted for anaesthesia with agent
delivery.
So anaesthetic ventilators are integrated with the anaesthetic machine and circle
system for delivering volatile anaesthesia in shorter, controlled settings,
while intensive-care ventilators offer more sophisticated modes and performance for
prolonged ventilation of the critically ill without volatile agents — a distinction
narrowing as modern anaesthetic workstations acquire advanced ventilatory
capability.
What are the principal hazards and failures of ventilators,
and how are they managed?
Ventilators, sustaining the patient's breathing,
can fail or cause harm in several ways,
and a systematic understanding of these hazards and their management is essential,
because ventilatory failure is one of the most rapidly lethal events in anaesthesia.
The most feared hazard is disconnection or a major leak, interrupting ventilation;
it is common, often at the patient connection, and is detected by capnography,
by low airway pressure and low expired volume alarms,
and by the disconnection alarm, the ascending bellows collapsing as a visible
warning, and managed by promptly identifying and correcting the disconnection or
reverting to manual ventilation.
Obstruction of the breathing system or airway raises the airway pressure,
detected by the high-pressure alarm and capnography,
and managed by relieving the obstruction.
Barotrauma from excessive pressure is guarded against by pressure limits and alarms
and by lung-protective settings.
Inadequate or excessive ventilation,
from incorrect settings or changing compliance,
is detected by capnography and volume monitoring and corrected by adjusting the
settings. Delivery of an incorrect gas or loss of anaesthetic agent risks
awareness, detected by agent monitoring.
Power or driving-gas failure stops a ventilator,
managed by reverting to manual ventilation with the reservoir bag and oxygen,
which must always be immediately available.
Misassembly and valve failure are detected by the pre-use check and monitoring.
The overarching defences are the pre-use check,
comprehensive monitoring with enabled alarms,
the constant availability of the means of manual ventilation,
and the anaesthetist's vigilance and preparedness.
So ventilator hazards — disconnection, obstruction, barotrauma,
inadequate or excessive ventilation, agent loss,
and power or driving-gas failure — are detected by capnography,
pressure and volume monitoring with alarms,
and managed by correction or reversion to manual ventilation,
with the pre-use check, vigilant monitoring and immediate availability of manual
ventilation as the essential defences.
Finally, draw together the principles of mechanical ventilation as they bear on
practice.
Drawing the station together, the anaesthetic ventilator is the device that
sustains the patient's breathing during anaesthesia,
and understanding its principles, modes,
physiological effects and hazards is fundamental to safe ventilation.
Its purpose is to deliver controlled or assisted ventilation reliably and safely,
guaranteeing either a set tidal volume, in volume control,
or a limited set pressure, in pressure control, each with its merits and risks,
and cycling between inspiration and expiration by time, volume, pressure or flow.
The bag-in-bottle and electric piston designs separate the driving power from the
patient's gas, preserving the controlled gas composition.
A range of modes, from full control to pressure support and synchronised
intermittent ventilation, allows ventilation to be matched to the patient and to
weaning, with PEEP to recruit lung and improve oxygenation,
and the inspiratory-expiratory ratio and pause adjusted for gas exchange.
Mechanical ventilation, however, raises intrathoracic pressure,
impeding venous return and altering ventilation-perfusion matching,
and can injure the lung through barotrauma, volutrauma, atelectrauma and biotrauma,
mitigated by lung-protective ventilation with low tidal volumes,
limited pressures and adequate PEEP.
Above all, because ventilatory failure is rapidly fatal and often silent,
comprehensive monitoring — capnography, airway pressure, volume,
disconnection and oxygen alarms — and the constant availability of manual
ventilation, together with the pre-use check and vigilance,
are the essential safeguards.
So mechanical ventilation unites the physics of gas delivery with respiratory
physiology and rigorous safety, and its principled,
monitored and lung-protective application is fundamental to safe anaesthesia.
Describe high-frequency ventilation and where it is used.
High-frequency ventilation is a distinct mode of mechanical ventilation that
delivers very small tidal volumes at very high frequencies,
and it has particular applications worth describing as a contrast to conventional
ventilation.
Conventional ventilation delivers tidal volumes that exceed the dead space at
normal respiratory rates; high-frequency ventilation, by contrast,
delivers tidal volumes that may be smaller than the anatomical dead space,
at frequencies far above the normal respiratory rate — from around one to fifteen
hertz, that is sixty to several hundred breaths per minute or more.
Gas exchange under these conditions does not occur by the bulk convective movement
of fresh gas to the alveoli as in normal breathing,
but by a combination of mechanisms including enhanced diffusion,
the dispersion of gas, and pendelluft movement between lung units.
The principal forms are high-frequency jet ventilation,
in which short pulses of gas are injected at high velocity through a narrow
cannula, entraining additional gas, and high-frequency oscillatory ventilation,
in which a piston or diaphragm oscillates the gas back and forth.
The advantages are the maintenance of low peak airway pressures and small volume
excursions, which may reduce barotrauma and volutrauma,
and the provision of a relatively still operative field.
The applications include certain airway and thoracic surgery,
particularly laryngeal and tracheal surgery where a jet allows operating on an
unobstructed airway, and the ventilation of severe respiratory failure in critical
care where conventional ventilation risks injury.
So high-frequency ventilation delivers very small tidal volumes,
sometimes below the dead space, at very high frequencies,
achieving gas exchange by enhanced diffusion and dispersion rather than bulk flow;
its jet and oscillatory forms maintain low pressures and small volume excursions,
used in airway and thoracic surgery and in severe respiratory failure.
Explain triggering and patient-ventilator synchrony.
Triggering and patient-ventilator synchrony concern how a ventilator responds to a
patient's own respiratory efforts in assisted and supported modes,
and they are important to the comfort and effectiveness of ventilation in the
spontaneously breathing patient.
Triggering is the mechanism by which the patient's inspiratory effort initiates a
ventilator breath in assisted modes.
The ventilator detects the patient's effort and responds by delivering the
supported or assisted breath; detection is by sensing either a small fall in
pressure in the circuit caused by the patient's inspiratory effort,
pressure triggering, or a change in a continuous background flow caused by the
patient drawing gas, flow triggering,
the latter generally being more sensitive and responsive.
The trigger sensitivity is adjustable:
it must be set sensitive enough that the patient can trigger the ventilator without
excessive effort, but not so sensitive that the ventilator self-triggers on circuit
movement, cardiac oscillation or leaks, which is called auto-triggering.
Patient-ventilator synchrony is the degree to which the ventilator's delivery of
breaths matches the patient's own respiratory pattern and demand in timing and flow.
Dyssynchrony — a mismatch, such as the ventilator cycling out of phase with the
patient, delivering breaths the patient does not want or failing to respond to
efforts — causes discomfort, increased work of breathing,
and inefficient ventilation, and is addressed by adjusting the trigger, the flow,
the inspiratory time and the mode to match the patient.
Good synchrony improves comfort and efficiency.
So triggering is the patient-effort-initiated delivery of assisted breaths,
detected by pressure or the more responsive flow sensing with adjustable
sensitivity avoiding auto-triggering,
and patient-ventilator synchrony is the matching of the ventilator to the patient's
pattern, dyssynchrony causing discomfort and inefficiency and being corrected by
adjusting the trigger, flow, timing and mode.
What do compliance and resistance contribute,
and how are they reflected in ventilator waveforms?
Compliance and resistance are the two mechanical properties of the respiratory
system that determine the relationship between the pressure,
volume and flow during ventilation,
and the ventilator's waveforms and loops reflect them,
providing valuable information at the bedside.
Compliance is the change in volume per unit change in pressure — the distensibility
of the lungs and chest wall — so that a compliant,
easily distensible respiratory system requires little pressure to inflate,
while a stiff, low-compliance system, as in fibrosis,
oedema or the acute respiratory distress syndrome,
requires high pressure for a given volume.
Resistance is the opposition to gas flow,
arising chiefly from the airways and the tracheal tube, so that a high resistance,
as in bronchospasm or a narrow tube,
requires a higher pressure to drive a given flow.
During volume-controlled ventilation,
the airway pressure rises through inspiration;
the peak pressure reflects both resistance and compliance,
while the plateau pressure, measured during an inspiratory pause when there is no
flow, reflects the compliance and alveolar pressure alone,
the difference between peak and plateau reflecting the resistance.
The pressure-volume loop displays compliance as its slope,
a flatter loop indicating lower compliance,
and reveals overdistension or recruitment,
while the flow-volume loop reveals resistance and obstruction.
Monitoring these allows the detection of changes — falling compliance from
atelectasis or pneumothorax, rising resistance from bronchospasm or a kinked tube —
and the optimisation of ventilation.
So compliance, the distensibility, and resistance, the opposition to flow,
determine the pressure needed to ventilate; the peak pressure reflects both,
the plateau pressure compliance alone, and their difference resistance,
while the pressure-volume and flow-volume loops display compliance and resistance
and reveal overdistension, recruitment and obstruction — informative for optimising
ventilation.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Anaesthetic ventilators deliver controlled or assisted ventilation safely;
they are classified by control variable (VOLUME generator - guarantees tidal volume
but variable, potentially high pressure;
PRESSURE generator - guarantees limited pressure but variable volume) and by
cycling (time-, volume-, pressure- or flow-cycled).
Second, The bag-in-bottle (bellows) and electric-piston designs separate the
DRIVING gas from the patient's gas,
preserving the controlled breathing-system composition;
the ASCENDING bellows is preferred because it collapses visibly on disconnection. 3.
PEEP maintains positive end-expiratory pressure to prevent alveolar collapse,
increase functional residual capacity,
reduce atelectasis and shunt and improve oxygenation - but raises intrathoracic
pressure, which (like IPPV generally) impedes venous return and can reduce cardiac
output, especially with hypovolaemia or high pressures.
Third, Ventilator-induced lung injury occurs via barotrauma (pressure),
volutrauma (overdistension), atelectrauma (cyclical collapse) and biotrauma
(inflammation); lung-protective ventilation uses low tidal volume (about 6 ml/kg
predicted weight), limited plateau/driving pressures,
adequate PEEP and permissive hypercapnia.
Fourth, Because ventilatory failure is rapidly fatal and often silent,
essential monitoring is capnography (confirms and assesses ventilation,
detects disconnection/obstruction), airway pressure (high/low alarms),
volume/flow (low-volume alarm), a disconnection alarm,
inspired oxygen and saturation, and agent monitoring - with the means of MANUAL
ventilation always immediately available.
Thank you. That concludes the station.